my claim about this whole category of
moral philosophy the whole ethical and
political approach of utilitarianism
it's not that it's meaningless but that
it is irrelevant to ethical questions to
questions of right and wrong questions
of whether or not we should do the right
thing just because it's the right thing
to do now my biggest disagreement with
özil with regard to ethics is in the
derivation of his ethics rather than the
ethics themselves so firstly eyes will
dismisses ideas like maximizing net
happiness or minimizing suffering as
meaningless or worthless I know we can't
accurately measure these things but I
think we can estimate them and these
estimators are essential to ethical
judgments and I know so my claim is that
the sphere of deontology sphere of
ethical philosophy and making decisions
about what we're going to do what we do
is separate from is not overlapping with
the sphere in which we could ask in a
meaningful and useful way these
questions about and that happiness
torture the military and the police
using torture is it ethically acceptable
to torture one person in order to
extract information in order to compel a
confession that could save the lives of
100 people so typical scenario still
today in 2019 the police or the military
are asking themselves whether or not
they should torture someone who is this
a suspected terrorist because there is
the possibility that this will reveal
information that will save a hundred
people's lives that will prevent a
terrorist attack this is an ethical
question this is a matter of de ontology
this is a matter of right and wrong this
is a matter of doing the right thing
because the right thing to do so from my
perspective this kind of pleasure pain
in calculus
the original terms used by John Stuart
Mill this idea of net happiness is
totally irrelevant okay either
procedurally torture is correct or
incorrect either this person is innocent
until proven guilty and has the right to
a trial and the right to remain silent
or they do not I mean there are all
kinds of ethical questions to be asked
here and even procedural and
bureaucratic and legal okay
but there is no question to be asked
there is no salience there is no
relevance of taking this abstract
equation whereby you have an imaginary
amount of pleasure and enjoyment and
then you subtract the amount of
suffering and pain and then ask well how
much is left over what's what is it a
positive or negative number at the end
of the equation
absolutely by definition any evil
whatsoever can be justified by this
equation now net happiness think about
the meaning of the word net
it's like net profit okay so net profit
you earn a certain amount of money and
it costs you a certain amount you lose a
certain amount of money so you subtract
the losses from the profits and what do
you get you get the net net net income
net profit whatever okay in this same
way you're talking about some a positive
quantity of happiness or well-being and
then subtracting the misery the harm the
torture the suffering you inflict
whatever it might be any evil whatsoever
can be justified this way including
killing cows in order to eat their flesh
there's there's no end do it okay what
about taking taxpayers money to build a
casino right there's suffering caused by
a casino poor people are going to get
poor people are gonna lose money
people's lives are gonna be destroyed by
gambling addiction there's also the
actual use of resources of taxpayers
money when you could have been building
something else that these negative
things but then what who can quantify
the enjoyment who can who can quantify
how much
happiness this casino will bring to the
people how much entertainment and
gambling and maybe there'll be music and
dancing and alcohol and cigars and
there's gonna be a fancy hotel you can
you can inflate in your own minds I in
your imagination in your estimate the
supposed pleasure being created by this
casino and it can justify any amount of
pain
what about torturing someone to death in
order to build a casino well what are
the units of this calculus it's
completely surreal now again coming back
to my original premise here I'm not
actually claiming that this line of
reasoning is completely meaningless or
completely useless I think it is only
meaningful and useful when we're
entirely outside of the domain of these
ethical questions so to give an example
if you have a museum and you're gonna
put on an exhibition of art but you're
gonna do this anyway it's already been
established let's say the government
assigned a certain budget the government
says okay you have ten million dollars
to put together an art exhibition now do
you want to put on an exhibition of
ancient Egyptian art or 17th century
French art or do you want to do an
exhibition on dinosaurs let's just say
hypothetically this this museum you can
use the same gallery you got 10 million
toys in this context it may be that it's
meaningful to ask about net happiness
it's may be meaningful to think in
utilitarian terms like well do people
here really care about ancient Egypt how
many people will attend this how many
people will enjoy this maybe also what
is the educational value I mean okay a
lot of children like dinosaurs but are
they really gonna learn anything if we
do another dinosaur exhibition as
opposed to the educational value of
talking about ancient Egypt or something
there can be contexts like this where I
think ethical and political questions
are frankly banal where this kind of
pleasure pain calculus this kind of
concept of net happiness may be
meaningful if it is a foregone
conclusion that the government is going
to
build a sports stadium so for whatever
reason there's a hundred million dollars
that will go into building the sports
stadium you have no that's there's no
question about that there's no option
here to take the hundred million dollars
and instead feed homeless people 100
million dollars have been set aside to
build a sports stadium and then you are
gonna ask the question should we build a
basketball Stadium or should we build an
ice hockey arena with this budget so you
can imagine that maybe a context in
which you are really asking questions
that very closely resemble net happiness
you can look okay how many people within
this city how many people really enjoy
hockey
how many enjoy basketball what are gonna
be the impacts on these sports and for
people as spectators and as athletes
maybe what's going to be the impact on
the local university or something so
there are contexts in which the greatest
happiness of the greatest number of
people is a meaningful question and can
even be a useful metric and where we can
agree on
even the unit's that make up the total
number in this guide you like it maybe
the unit is how many people would buy
tickets to attend a sports event or to
go to a museum or to see a movie there
may actually be Aerith matically real
measurable units of human enjoyment
involved and we may be able to think in
these terms what's bizarre and tragic
and surreal is that this ultimately
misguided economistic way of thinking
it's a pseudo economic way of thinking
has been applied to questions in
political science politics ethics
morality it's been applied to questions
where it has absolutely no validity
[Music]